Add guidance for Exit this page component and pattern (#2721)
alphagov/govuk-design-system: src/components/exit-this-page/index.md

---

> title: Exit this page

Author: From @davidc-gds:

> A very small Q on pattern naming conventions: I think we usually go with ‘a’ instead of ‘the’?
> So, ‘Exit a page quickly’
> Would match ‘Start using a service’ and others.

description: Give users a way to quickly exit a service, website or application quickly and safely.
section: Components
aliases:
backlog_issue_id: 213
layout: layout-pane.njk
status: Experimental

> statusMessage: This component is currently experimental and part of a community consultation.

Author: > Add information about how the component is published as experimental, which aspects are not tested, and where teams will need to do research
> (Link to Research heading, with further messaging

```suggestion
statusMessage: This component is currently experimental. [You'll need to do your own research](#research-on-this-component) to decide whether to add this component to your service.
```

Keep in mind that seeing this component might discourage certain users from using your service. If the user does not identify themselves as being at risk, they might see the button on a service and decide it’s not relevant to them.

## How it works

There are 2 ways to use the exit this page component. You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

The Exit this page component has several parts, including:
- a button, that takes the user to another website
- a secondary link, to give people that use assistive technologies a way to activate the component
- a loading overlay, to immediately clears any content off the browser until the next website loads

All parts of this component must be used together and alongside the Exit the page quickly pattern.

## Adding a button

Position the button component immediately below the header of your page. Its position should be 'sticky', so that as the user scrolls down the page, the button remains visible and is easy to activate. 

> On mobile devices, position the component at the bottom of the screen at all times. This makes it easier to press with their thumb and hidden with their hand.

Reviewer: I think this is old information. 

Although this was the original desire, following [the spike into positioning](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/pull/2947), we found that having the button at the bottom of the screen caused it to be obscured by the on-screen keyboard when it was open. 

We've since kept it so that it's initially placed near the top of the page (below the header, but before the H1) and sticks to the top of the screen when scrolling down.

Author: ```suggestion
On mobile devices, position the button immediately below the header and make it 'stick' to the top of the screen when the user scrolls down the page.
```

To activate the secondary link, users will need to either:
- tab to the Exit this page link
- press the shift key 3 times

These will perform the same action as pressing the button.

### Showing progress for 'Shift key' presses

To show the user the number of times they’ve pressed the shift button, there’s a series of 3 progress dots under the button, provided as a visual enhancement. Each time the shift key is pressed, one of the dots will be filled.

The user has 5 seconds to press the shift key 3 times. After that, the sequence and progress dots will reset.

This feature requires the user to have Javascript enabled on their browser.

## Loading overlay

When the user activates Exit this page, a ‘loading overlay’ will immediately appear. This is to help users with slow connections clear their screen until the browser loads the next page.

## Research on this component

The design of this component is based on research with people with a lived experience of domestic abuse and people with accessibility needs, and in consultation with the Ministry of Justice, Department for Work and Pensions and the Scottish Government.

> 

Author: > https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system/issues/2067
> Add information about how the component is published as experimental, which aspects are not tested, and where teams will need to do research

Adding messaging here. 
- [ ] Are there more specifics on which aspects need more research?

```suggestion

We're confident this component would be useful for other types of users, but research is needed to prove it's useful and safe for them. You'll need to carry out your own research to decide whether to use this component and add it to your service.
```

> Live examples of similar components can be found on these websites:
> - [GOV.UK: Check if you can get legal aid](https://www.gov.uk/check-legal-aid)
> - [GOV.UK: Apply for help arranging child maintenance](https://child-maintenance.service.gov.uk/apply/eligibility/info)
> - [mygov.scot: Domestic abuse support](https://www.mygov.scot/domestic-abuse/)
> - [Women’s aid website](https://www.womensaid.org.uk/)
> - [Refuge website](https://www.nationaldahelpline.org.uk/)

Author: ```suggestion
### List of services using this component

Live examples can be found on these websites:
- [GOV.UK: Check if you can get legal aid](https://www.gov.uk/check-legal-aid)
- [GOV.UK: Apply for help arranging child maintenance](https://child-maintenance.service.gov.uk/apply/eligibility/info)
- [mygov.scot: Domestic abuse support](https://www.mygov.scot/domestic-abuse/)
- [Women’s aid website](https://www.womensaid.org.uk/)
- [Refuge website](https://www.nationaldahelpline.org.uk/)
```

### Accessibility features and considerations

> We'll explain why there’s the keyboard option and the skip-link version.
> 
> We'll explain our testing with Dragon, and what we expect to be possible.

Author: Need to fill in, possibly this can be adapted from blog drafts

```suggestion
We'll explain why there’s the keyboard option and the skip-link version.

We'll explain our testing with Dragon, and what we expect to be possible.
```

Author: Outline:
- there’s 2 additional ways to activate EtP
- keyboard option for keyboard users with motor impairments, also offers a discreet options
- ...some iterations use single key press, but we were not confident that this could be done without interfering with other user actions
- skip link option for users to give assistive tech users an easier way to reliably reach for the button
- ...investigated a disguised command, but decided that ‘item numbers’, etc. was sufficient
- and then a summary of accessibility testing? (Can someone send me a link and summarise findings?)

Author: First draft at this. Still need a link or summary of accessibility testing.

```suggestion
In addition to the 'Exit this page' button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and discreet as possible for users.

The keyboard option, where the user can press shift 3 times, gives users a discreet way to activate the component, particularly keyboard-only users. We considered options that used a single key press (such as the 'Esc' key), but we could not be confident that this would not interfere with other user actions.

The 'skip link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page, immediately between [xxxxx] and [xxxxx]. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliable activate the component. 

To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'skip link' more discreetly, we considered disguising the 'Exit this page' link text with something else. However, we decided that this could confuse users and other methods, such as referring to the link by item number would meet their need.
```

The 'loading overlay' will appear immediately when the user activates Exit this page.

The overlay helps users with slow connections clear their screen until the browser loads the next page.

### Showing progress for 'Shift key' presses

To show the user the number of times they’ve pressed the shift button, there’s a series of 3 progress dots under the button, provided as a visual enhancement. Each time the shift key is pressed, one of the dots will be filled.

The user has 5 seconds to press the shift key 3 times. After that, the sequence and progress dots will reset.

## Research on this component

### Accessibility features and considerations

In addition to the 'Exit this page' button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and as discreet as possible for users.

The keyboard option, where the user can press shift 3 times, gives users a discreet way to activate the component, particularly keyboard-only users. We considered options that used a single key press (such as the 'Esc' key), but we could not be confident that this would not interfere with other user actions.

> The 'skip link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.

Author: ```suggestion
The 'secondary link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.
```

> The 'skip link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.
> 
> To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'skip link' more discreetly, we considered  renaming the 'Exit this page' link into something else that hid its real purpose. 
> 
> However, we decided this was more likely to confuse users. We're also confident about the other ways users can use speech recognition software to activate the 'skip link' without saying the text out loud, such choosing the link as an item number on a list.

Author: ```suggestion
The 'secondary link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.

To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'skip link' more discreetly, we considered  renaming the 'Exit this page' link into something else that hid its real purpose. 

However, we decided this was more likely to confuse users. We're also confident about the other ways users can use speech recognition software to activate the 'secondary link' without saying the text out loud, such choosing the link as an item number on a list.
```

> ## Research on this component
> 
> ### Accessibility features and considerations
> 
> In addition to the 'Exit this page' button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and as discreet as possible for users.
> 
> The keyboard option, where the user can press shift 3 times, gives users a discreet way to activate the component, particularly keyboard-only users. We considered options that used a single key press (such as the 'Esc' key), but we could not be confident that this would not interfere with other user actions.
> 
> The 'skip link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.
> 
> To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'skip link' more discreetly, we considered  renaming the 'Exit this page' link into something else that hid its real purpose. 
> 
> However, we decided this was more likely to confuse users. We're also confident about the other ways users can use speech recognition software to activate the 'skip link' without saying the text out loud, such choosing the link as an item number on a list.

Author: ```suggestion
### Accessibility features and considerations

In addition to the 'Exit this page' button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and as discreet as possible for users.

The keyboard option, where the user can press shift 3 times, gives users a discreet way to activate the component, particularly keyboard-only users. We considered options that used a single key press (such as the 'Esc' key), but we could not be confident that this would not interfere with other user actions.

The 'skip link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.

To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'skip link' more discreetly, we considered  renaming the 'Exit this page' link into something else that hid its real purpose. 

However, we decided this was more likely to confuse users. We're also confident about the other ways users can use speech recognition software to activate the 'skip link' without saying the text out loud, such choosing the link as an item number on a list.

## Research on this component
```

## How it works

There are 2 ways to use the exit this page component. You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

## Adding a button

Position the component at the top of your page, above the beginning of the grid (`<div class="govuk-grid-row">`) but still within the width container (`<div class="govuk-width-container">`).

### Choosing a different website to load

When activated, the component by default will take the user to the [homepage of BBC Weather](https://www.bbc.co.uk/weather). You can change this if there’s a more appropriate site for your users.

Avoid websites that might show personalised pages (such as frequently visited, last visited, or suggested links), as this content could put the user at risk.

## Consider what to do with user session data

You’ll need to decide if your service will store the user’s session data after they’ve activated the Exit this page component and left your service.

We recommend that services clear the user’s session data once they’ve activated Exit this page.

## Adding the secondary link

> Add the code for the secondary link into the layout file of your service. The secondary link is an additional `govuk-skip-link` that works in a similar way. Place it under the page template's default skip link at the very top of the body.
> 
> When the user interacts with the secondary link, it will perform the same action as pressing the button to activate Exit this Page.
> 
> [EXAMPLE OF SECONDARY LINK]
> 
> The component will still work if the secondary link is not added, but it'll be less accessible overall.

Author: ```suggestion
Add the code for the 'secondary link' into the layout file of your service. The 'secondary link' is an additional `govuk-skip-link` that works in a similar way. Place it under the page template's default skip link at the very top of the body.

When the user interacts with the 'secondary link', it will perform the same action as pressing the button to activate Exit this Page.

[EXAMPLE OF SECONDARY LINK]

The component will still work if the 'secondary link' is not added, but it'll be less accessible overall.
```

> {{ example({group: "components", item: "exit-this-page", example: "secondary-link", html: true, nunjucks: true, open: false, size: "s"}) }}

Author: ```suggestion
[EXAMPLE OF SECONDARY LINK]
```

The 'secondary link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.

To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'secondary link' more discreetly, we considered  renaming the 'Exit this page' link into something else that hid its real purpose. 

However, we decided this was more likely to confuse users. We're also confident about the other ways users can use speech recognition software to activate the 'secondary link' without saying the text out loud, such choosing the link as an item number on a list.

## Research on this component

The design of this component is based on research with people with a lived experience of domestic abuse and people with accessibility needs, and in consultation with the Ministry of Justice, Department for Work and Pensions and the Scottish Government.

> [Tell us if your service uses this component (opens in a new tab)](https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/). This will help us improve this component to better meet the needs of the services that use it.

Author: Need to add link to the survey once we create it.
```suggestion
[[ADD LINK] Tell us if your service uses this component (opens in a new tab)](https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/). This will help us improve this component to better meet the needs of the services that use it.
```

### List of services using this component

Live examples can be found on these websites:
- [GOV.UK: Check if you can get legal aid](https://www.gov.uk/check-legal-aid)
- [GOV.UK: Apply for help arranging child maintenance](https://child-maintenance.service.gov.uk/apply/eligibility/info)
- [mygov.scot: Domestic abuse support](https://www.mygov.scot/domestic-abuse/)
- [Women’s aid website](https://www.womensaid.org.uk/)
- [Refuge website](https://www.nationaldahelpline.org.uk/)

### Known issues and gaps

We've tested this component mainly with users at risk of domestic abuse. However we've not done extensive testing with any other user groups.

Before using this component, you should do research with your users. If you do, we'd welcome any feedback and findings you can share with us.

We're particularly interested in investigations into how well this component works on static pages of information ('flat content').

> Share your feedback, use cases and research findings on the [‘Exit this page’ discussion space on GitHub](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system/discussions/categories/exit-this-page). We also share summaries of our own decision making, work and research and welcome your input.

Author: ```suggestion
Share your feedback, use cases and research findings on the [‘Exit this page’ discussion space on GitHub](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system/discussions/categories/exit-this-page). 

We also share notes about our decisions, work and research in the GitHub discussion space and welcome your feedback on those.
```

---
title: Exit this page
description: Give users a way to quickly and safely exit a service, website or application.
section: Components
aliases:
backlog_issue_id: 213
layout: layout-pane.njk
status: Experimental
statusMessage: This component is currently experimental. <a class="govuk-link" href="#known-issues-and-gaps">You'll need to do your own research</a> to decide whether to add this component to your service.
---
{% from "_example.njk" import example %}

Give users a way to quickly and safely exit a service, website or application.

> For service journeys, you must use this component with the pattern to help a user [exit a page quickly](/patterns/exit-a-page-quickly/).

Author: ```suggestion
For service journeys, you must use this component with the pattern to help a user [Exit a page quickly](/patterns/exit-a-page-quickly/).
```

## When to use this component

Use the component on pages with sensitive information that could:
- put someone at risk of abuse or retaliation
- reveal someone’s plans to avoid or escape from harm

For example, when a potential victim is using a service to help them leave a domestic abuser.

You can use this component on either:
- all the pages in a service
- parts of the journey with sensitive information

You can also use this component for standalone content pages, such as dashboards and guidance.

## When not to use this component

Do not use this component if the service or content is unlikely to put a user at risk. See the [Exit a page quickly](/patterns/exit-a-page-quickly/) pattern for examples of at-risk and sensitive topics.

The 'Exit this page' component is a [button component](/components/button/) that has been marked up with addtional CSS and JavaScript functionality, to make it work in a specific way. 

Keep in mind that seeing this component might discourage certain users from using your service. If the user does not identify themselves as being at risk, they might see the button on a service and decide it’s not relevant to them.

## How it works

> There are 2 ways to use this component. You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

Author: ```suggestion
There are 2 ways to use this component. You can use HTML or, if you're using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.
```

### Adding the button

Position the component at the top of your page, above the beginning of the grid (`<div class="govuk-grid-row">`) but still within the width container (`<div class="govuk-width-container">`).

### Choosing a different website to load

When activated, the component by default will take the user to the [homepage of BBC Weather](https://www.bbc.co.uk/weather). You can change this if there’s a more appropriate site for your users.

> Avoid websites that might show personalised pages (such as frequently visited, last visited, or suggested links), as this content could put the user at risk.

Author: Remove oxford comma

```suggestion
Avoid websites that might show personalised pages (such as frequently visited, last visited or suggested links), as this content could put the user at risk.
```

## Consider what to do with user session data

You’ll need to decide if your service will store the user’s session data after they’ve activated the Exit this page component and left your service.

For example, you could do this in 2 steps:
1. replace the default website link to a URL in your service, that when visited, will clear the user's session data
2. redirect the user to another website, such as BBC Weather

> ## Adding the secondary link

Reviewer 2: Yes I think that would look and feel better

> ## Adding the secondary link

Author: Let's do it!

> 
> ## Consider what to do with user session data
> 
> You’ll need to decide if your service will store the user’s session data after they’ve activated the Exit this page component and left your service.
> 
> For example, you could do this in 2 steps:
> 1. replace the default website link to a URL in your service, that when visited, will clear the user's session data
> 2. redirect the user to another website, such as BBC Weather
> 
> ## Adding the secondary link
> 
> Add the code for the 'secondary link' into the layout file of your service. The 'secondary link' is an additional `govuk-skip-link` that works in a similar way. Place it under the page template's default skip link at the very top of the body.
> 
> When the user interacts with the 'secondary link', it will perform the same action as pressing the button to activate Exit this Page.
> 
> {{ example({group: "components", item: "exit-this-page", example: "secondary-link", html: true, nunjucks: true, open: false, size: "s"}) }}
> 
> The `href` for the 'secondary link' should be the same as the URL used for the button.
> 
> The component will still work if the 'secondary link' is not added, but it'll be less accessible overall.

Author: ```suggestion
## Adding the secondary link

Add the code for the 'secondary link' into the layout file of your service. The 'secondary link' is an additional `govuk-skip-link` that works in a similar way. Place it under the page template's default skip link at the very top of the body.

When the user interacts with the 'secondary link', it will perform the same action as pressing the button to activate Exit this Page.

{{ example({group: "components", item: "exit-this-page", example: "secondary-link", html: true, nunjucks: true, open: false, size: "s"}) }}

The `href` for the 'secondary link' should be the same as the URL used for the button.

The component will still work if the 'secondary link' is not added, but it'll be less accessible overall.

## Consider what to do with user session data

You’ll need to decide if your service will store the user’s session data after they’ve activated the Exit this page component and left your service.

For example, you could do this in 2 steps:
1. replace the default website link to a URL in your service, that when visited, will clear the user's session data
2. redirect the user to another website, such as BBC Weather

```

## Enhancement features

> These features are included in the component and should work automatically, as long as the user has enabled Javascript their browser. You do not need to do anything to make these work.

Author: Missing word

```suggestion
These features are included in the component and should work automatically, as long as the user has enabled Javascript in their browser. You do not need to do anything to make these work.
```

### Loading overlay

The 'loading overlay' will appear immediately when the user activates Exit this page.

The overlay helps users with slow connections clear their screen until the browser loads the next page.

> ### Showing progress for 'Shift key' presses

Author: ```suggestion
### Showing progress for 'shift key' presses
```

To show the user the number of times they’ve pressed the shift button, there’s a series of 3 progress dots under the button, provided as a visual enhancement. Each time the shift key is pressed, one of the dots will be filled.

The user has 5 seconds to press the shift key 3 times. After that, the sequence and progress dots will reset.

## Accessibility features and considerations

> In addition to the 'Exit this page' button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and as discreet as possible for users.

Author: ```suggestion
In addition to the Exit this page button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and as discreet as possible for users.
```

> The keyboard option, where the user can press shift 3 times, gives users a discreet way to activate the component, particularly keyboard-only users. We considered options that used a single key press (such as the 'Esc' key), but we could not be confident that this would not interfere with other user actions.

Author: ```suggestion
The keyboard option, where the user can press shift 3 times, gives users a discreet way to activate the component, particularly keyboard-only users. We considered options that used a single key press (such as the 'esc' key), but we could not be confident that this would not interfere with other user actions.
```

The 'secondary link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.

> To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'secondary link' more discreetly, we considered  renaming the 'Exit this page' link into something else that hid its real purpose. 

Author: ```suggestion
To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'secondary link' more discreetly, we considered changing the link text to something else that hid its real purpose. 
```

However, we decided this was more likely to confuse users. We're also confident about the other ways users can use speech recognition software to activate the 'secondary link' without saying the text out loud, such choosing the link as an item number on a list.

## Research on this component

The design of this component is based on research with people with a lived experience of domestic abuse and people with accessibility needs, and in consultation with the Ministry of Justice, Department for Work and Pensions and the Scottish Government.

> [[ADD LINK] Tell us if your service uses this component (opens in a new tab)](https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/). This will help us improve this component to better meet the needs of the services that use it.

Author: ```suggestion
Tell us if your service uses this component on our [usage survey (opens in a new tab)](https://surveys.publishing.service.gov.uk/s/MPR0MV/). This will help us improve this component to better meet the needs of the services that use it.
```

We plan to show more information about how many services use this component.

### Known issues and gaps

We've tested this component mainly with users at risk of domestic abuse. However we've not done extensive testing with any other user groups.

Before using this component, you should do research with your users. If you do, we'd welcome any feedback and findings you can share with us.

We're particularly interested in investigations into how well this component works on static pages of information ('flat content').

> Share your feedback, use cases and research findings on the [‘Exit this page’ discussion space on GitHub](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system/discussions/categories/exit-this-page). 

Author: ```suggestion
Share your feedback, use cases and research findings on the [Exit this page discussion space on GitHub](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system/discussions/categories/exit-this-page). 
```

---
title: Exit this page

> description: Give users a way to quickly exit a service, website or application quickly and safely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Give users a way to quickly and safely exit a service, website or application.
```

section: Components
aliases:
backlog_issue_id: 213
layout: layout-pane.njk
status: Experimental
statusMessage: This component is currently experimental. <a class="govuk-link" href="#known-issues-and-gaps">You'll need to do your own research</a> to decide whether to add this component to your service.
---
{% from "_example.njk" import example %}

> Give users a way to quickly exit a service, website or application quickly and safely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Give users a way to quickly and safely exit a service, website or application.
```

{{ example({group: "components", item: "exit-this-page", example: "default", html: true, nunjucks: true, open: false, size: "s"}) }}

## When to use this component

Use the component on pages with sensitive information that could:
- put someone at risk of abuse or retaliation
- reveal someone’s plans to avoid or escape from harm

For example, when a potential victim is using a service to help them leave a domestic abuser.

You can use this component on either:
- all the pages in a service
- parts of the journey with sensitive information

You can also use this component for standalone content pages, such as dashboards and guidance.

## When not to use this component

Do not use this component if the service or content is unlikely to put a user at risk. See the [Exit a page quickly](/patterns/exit-a-page-quickly/) pattern for examples of at-risk and sensitive topics.

Keep in mind that seeing this component might discourage certain users from using your service. If the user does not identify themselves as being at risk, they might see the button on a service and decide it’s not relevant to them.

> ## How it works

Reviewer 4: Non-blocking comment: does this need some sort of intro sentence/paragraph so it's not just the tech line? Rough idea:

>The exit this page component is a [button component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/button/) marked up as a link with additional CSS and javaScript functionality applied to it.

There's probably a better way to write that.

There are 2 ways to use the exit this page component. You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

> ## Adding a button

Reviewer 4: Should this be a h3 under the "how it works" h2? Also a mini opinion on content.

```suggestion
### Adding the button
```

Reviewer 4: Maybe it should be "adding the **visual** button"

> There are 2 ways to use the exit this page component. You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

Author: Bit anxious about touching this one as it's a common line on many different components. Could look into it though as the bullet point layout would be clearer to read.

> There are 2 ways to use the exit this page component. You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

Reviewer 3: Maybe something to consider as a revamp of the pages in general.

The Exit this page component has several parts, including:
- a button, that takes the user to another website
- a secondary link, to give people that use assistive technologies a way to activate the component

> - a loading overlay, to immediately clears any content off the browser until the next website loads

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- a loading overlay, to immediately clear any content off the browser until the next website loads
```

> All parts of this component must be used together and alongside the Exit a page quickly pattern.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You must use all parts of this component with the Exit a page quickly pattern.
```

Reviewer 3: also, do we want to use single quotes around the names of the pattern and component to differentiate them in the sentence?

## Adding a button

> Position the button component immediately below the header of your page. Its position should be 'sticky', so that as the user scrolls down the page, the button remains visible and is easy to activate. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Position the button component immediately below the header of your page. Its position should be 'sticky', so as the user scrolls down the page, the button remains visible and easy to activate. 
```

> On mobile devices, position the button immediately below the header and make it 'stick' to the top of the screen when the user scrolls down the page.

Author: ```suggestion
On mobile devices, position the button immediately below the header and make it 'stick' to the top of the screen as the user scrolls down the page.
```

> We recommend that services clear the user’s session data once they’ve activated Exit this page.

Reviewer 4: Another non-blocker: I'm wondering there's an opportunity go into more detail here or if that would muddy the waters. An example of what I'm thinking:

```suggestion
We recommend that services clear the user’s session data once they’ve activated Exit this page. An example of how to do this in your service could be to change the default button URL to a page in your service which when visited, clears the user's session data then automatically redirects to an inconspicuous website.
```

> When the user presses the button, their browser will immediately go to a predetermined page that’s set in the code, which is BBC weather by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the user presses the button, their browser will immediately go to a predetermined page that’s set in the code. The default page is BBC weather.
```

## Adding the secondary link

Add the code for the 'secondary link' into the layout file of your service. The 'secondary link' is an additional `govuk-skip-link` that works in a similar way. Place it under the page template's default skip link at the very top of the body.

When the user interacts with the 'secondary link', it will perform the same action as pressing the button to activate Exit this Page.

> [EXAMPLE OF SECONDARY LINK]

Reviewer 4: The code for this example, excluding frontmatter, would look like this:

```nunjucks
{% from "govuk/components/skip-link/macro.njk" import govukSkipLink %}

{{ govukSkipLink({
    href: "https://bbc.co.uk/weather/",
    classes: "govuk-js-exit-this-page-skiplink"
  }) }}
```

> ## Consider what to do user session data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Consider what to do with user session data
```

> The component will still work if the 'secondary link' is not added, but it'll be less accessible overall.

Reviewer 4: Minor extra sentence. Unsure if it's necessary or not:

```suggestion
The `href` for the 'secondary link' should be the same as the URL used for the visual button.

The component will still work if the 'secondary link' is not added, but it'll be less accessible overall.
```

> We recommend that services clear the user’s session data once they’ve activated Exit this page. This can be through the button, the secondary skip link or pressing the shift button 3 times.

Author: ```suggestion
We recommend that services clear the user’s session data once they’ve activated Exit this page, whether they've done so by using the button, the secondary skip link or pressing the shift button 3 times.
```

## Adding the secondary link

> The code will need to go in the layout file of your service. It will need to go after your block header.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The code for the secondary link will need to go in the layout file of your service. It will need to go after your block header.
```

To activate the secondary link, users will need to either:
- tab to the Exit this page link
- press the shift key 3 times

These will perform the same action as pressing the button.

### Showing progress for 'Shift key' presses

To show the user the number of times they’ve pressed the shift button, there’s a series of 3 progress dots under the button, provided as a visual enhancement. Each time the shift key is pressed, one of the dots will be filled.

The user has 5 seconds to press the shift key 3 times. After that, the sequence and progress dots will reset.

This feature requires the user to have Javascript enabled on their browser.

## Loading overlay

When the user activates Exit this page, a ‘loading overlay’ will immediately appear. This is to help users with slow connections clear their screen until the browser loads the next page.

## Research on this component

### Accessibility features and considerations

> In addition to the 'Exit this page' button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and discreet as possible for users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to the 'Exit this page' button itself, users have 2 other options to activate the component. We've tested and iterated both of these options to be accessible, reliable and as discreet as possible for users.
```

The keyboard option, where the user can press shift 3 times, gives users a discreet way to activate the component, particularly keyboard-only users. We considered options that used a single key press (such as the 'Esc' key), but we could not be confident that this would not interfere with other user actions.

The 'skip link' option is a hidden link in the tab order of the page. This gives users of assistive technology and easier way to reliably activate the component.

> To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'skip link' more discreetly, we considered disguising the 'Exit this page' link text with something else. However, we decided that this could confuse users and other methods, such as referring to the link by item number would meet their need.

Reviewer 3: I don't fully understand this bit. Was the 'something else' considered also the 'item number' mentioned later? Or is item number the chosen method? And also what methods are confused?

Author: ```suggestion
To help users of speech recognition software activate the 'skip link' more discreetly, we considered  renaming the 'Exit this page' link into something else that hid its real purpose. 

However, we decided this was more likely to confuse users. We're also confident about the other ways users can use speech recognition software to activate the 'skip link' without saying the text out loud, such choosing the link as an item number on a list.
```

> ### List of services using this component

Reviewer 4: This list includes non-govuk websites which are using _an_ exit this page component but might not be using _our_ one. Is the framing of this title and the including of these reference website muddying the waters of this guidance?

The design of this component is based on research with people with a lived experience of domestic abuse and people with accessibility needs, and in consultation with the Ministry of Justice, Department for Work and Pensions and the Scottish Government.

> ### Known issues and gaps

Author: Add feedback methods here.

You can use this component on either:
- all the pages in a service
- parts of the journey with sensitive information

You can also use this component for standalone content pages, such as dashboards and guidance.

## When not to use this component

Do not use this component if the service or content is unlikely to put a user at risk. See the [Exit a page quickly](/patterns/exit-a-page-quickly/) pattern for examples of at-risk and sensitive topics.

Keep in mind that seeing this component might discourage certain users from using your service. If the user does not identify themselves as being at risk, they might see the button on a service and decide it’s not relevant to them.

## How it works

There are 2 ways to use the exit this page component. You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

The Exit this page component has several parts, including:
- a button, that takes the user to another website
- a secondary link, to give people that use assistive technologies a way to activate the component
- a loading overlay, to immediately clear any content off the browser until the next website loads

> You must use all parts of this component with the 'Exit a page quickly' pattern.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure this list is the best way to represent what the user needs to do to make the component "work".

- The button point implies to me at least that there's something extra the user needs to add other than the component itself in the markup above. That markup is literally a govuk button with a little bit of extra markup, but I think this wording creates confusion.
- I think we should be specific that the secondary link is a govuk skiplink and include a code example plus where to should go. Additionally, the component will still work if the skiplink isn't included, it'll simply be less accessible overall.
- The user doesn't need to do anything or add anything to make the loading overlay work, it's a javascript feature that works automatically.

I suggest removing this list and instead further down the page adding something about the secondary link, including a code example and where we should put it (below the default page template skiplink).

## Adding a button

> Position the button component immediately below the header of your page. Its position should be 'sticky', so as the user scrolls down the page, the button remains visible and easy to activate. 
> 
> On mobile devices, position the button immediately below the header and make it 'stick' to the top of the screen as the user scrolls down the page.
> 
> When the user presses the button, their browser will immediately go to a predetermined page that’s set in the code. The default page is the [homepage of BBC weather](https://www.bbc.co.uk/weather).

Reviewer 4: The sticky positioning is handed by the CSS so I don't think we need to be specific about it. The user doesn't need to do anything to make it sticky other than load govuk-frontend, use the component markup and put it in the right place. I therefore think we should be specific about where to put it in the HTML. Related, this guidance isn't accurate and the button shouldn't be positioned under the H1.

I'm also gonna suggest removing the BBC default point as it's repeated in the next section.

```suggestion
Position the component at the top of your page, above the beginning of the grid (`<div class="govuk-grid-row">`) but still within the width container (`<div class="govuk-width-container">`).
```

Reviewer 2: I'm happy with for this suggestion to be committed, I wrote this with a rough idea of how it worked technically but Owen has a much better understanding of it.

### Choosing a different website to load

> The component is set to take the user to the [homepage of BBC Weather](https://www.bbc.co.uk/weather). You can change this if there’s a more appropriate site for your users.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The component by default will take the user to the [homepage of BBC Weather](https://www.bbc.co.uk/weather) when activated. You can change this if there’s a more appropriate site for your users.
```

Reviewer 2: As above

Author: Small edit from Owen's suggestions to the active voice.

```suggestion
When activated, the component by default will take the user to the [homepage of BBC Weather](https://www.bbc.co.uk/weather). You can change this if there’s a more appropriate site for your users.
```

Avoid websites that might show personalised pages (such as frequently visited, last visited, or suggested links), as this content could put the user at risk.

## Consider what to do with user session data

You’ll need to decide if your service will store the user’s session data after they’ve activated the Exit this page component and left your service.

> We recommend that services clear the user’s session data once they’ve activated Exit this page, whether they've done so by using the button, the secondary skip link or pressing the shift button 3 times.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We recommend that services clear the user’s session data once they’ve activated Exit this page.
```

## Adding the secondary link

Add the code for the secondary link into the layout file of your service. Place it after your block header.

To activate the secondary link, users will need to either:
- tab to the Exit this page link
- press the shift key 3 times

> These will perform the same action as pressing the button.

Reviewer 4: Aha you do mention it further down the page.

Firstly, this is inaccurate information. The secondary link doesn't utilise any the keyboard activation feature that the main button does. It's just a skiplink. The only thing it does is it also triggers the loading overlay when activated. All the js stuff is handled in the button on the page.

That's also the wrong place to position the skiplink. It should go under the page template skip link at the very top of the body.

Secondly, as mentioned above, I think we should include a code example.

> ### Showing progress for 'Shift key' presses

Reviewer 4: This section as a h3 and the loading overlay as a h2 feel a bit odd. I wonder if there should be a h2 called "features" where we talk about some of the in depth stuff that ETP does.

At the same time I also wonder how much detail we need to go into here. It's neat that ETP does this stuff, but it's not actually relevant to users getting the component into their services.

To show the user the number of times they’ve pressed the shift button, there’s a series of 3 progress dots under the button, provided as a visual enhancement. Each time the shift key is pressed, one of the dots will be filled.

The user has 5 seconds to press the shift key 3 times. After that, the sequence and progress dots will reset.

> This feature requires the user to have Javascript enabled on their browser.

Reviewer 4: I wonder if there's a way to frame this to cover all the js features. Putting it just here implies (to me) that only this requires js when js is also controlling the loading overlay.
